# Comparative-Variance-Partition-along-the-Slow-Fast-Continuum
Computes means and variances of life history outcomes, as well as variance partition results for a given set of heterogeneous populations (parameterized by the user).

___

# PROJECT OVERVIEW

**Full description:** This set of MATLAB () scripts and functions reproduces the variance partition results of the article: "Differential Contributions of Heterogeneity and Stochasticity to Individuals’ Life Histories along the Slow-fast Continuum". This code's main purpose is to conduct comparative analyzes between heterogeneous populations representative of different species along the slow-fast continuum. The life cycle of these heterogenous populations are modeled using a matrix population model (MPM) whose details are presented in the article. By implementing standard MPM procedures and equations, the code computes the mean and variance of life history outcomes (longevity and lifetime reproductive output). It also computes the decomposition of the total variance in life history outcomes (within group + between group variance) as well as the factorial decomposition of the between group variance when heterogeneity in the population comes from multiple factors (i.e. heterogeneity on several vital rates simultaneously). The code can be modified to produce results for either quality or tradeoff heterogeneity (see comments in the "main.m" file). The script "plotresults_articlescript.m" uses results output from "main.m" and reproduces the figures found in the article. 

This repository contains matlab code and example results. 
- main.m: Main script to run in order to reproduce the results. All parameters defining vital rates, and heterogeneity already have default values that correspond to what was used for the article. The script calls functions that construct the matrix models for heterogeneous populations, the functions that compute life history outcomes, and the functions that compute variance partition results.
- plotresults_articlescript.m: Script that plots the data generated by main.m. Allows to reproduce figures from the result section and appendix of the article. 
- popHeteromatfact.m: Function that computes the transition matrix (U), fertility matrix (F), and returns U,F and A (A = F + U).
- lifetimeoutput.m: Function that computes and returns the mean and variance of life expectancy. 
- reprooutputfactorial.m: Function that computes and returns the mean and variance of lifetime reproductive output. 
- minusparamfinder_ConstantG.m: Function that computes the difference between the population growth rate of any baseline population and the growth rate of a corresponding heterogeneous population (for which we know the phenotype distribution at birth and the vital rates of high quality individuals). 
- minusparamfinder_ConstantLambda.m: Function that computes the difference between the population growth rate time of any baseline population and the population growth rate of a corresponding heterogeneous population (for which we know the phenotype distribution at birth and the vital rates of high quality individuals). 
- det_outputfactorial.m: Function that returns the population's growth rate, it's stable stage distribution.
- varcalc.m: Function that returns the between group variance. 
- vardecomposition.m: Function that returns the list of all componants of the between group variance.
- viridis.m: Function that generates a custom viridis colorscale. Colormap designed by Eric Firing, Nathaniel J. Smith, and Stefan van der Walt. 

Additional information and details about each script and function is provided as comments in the code.

It is possible to reuse this code to explore different species from the six synthetic one we selected for publication. Adding/removing/modifying baseline populations for our two stage model is very straightfoward (simply change the "thetamatpop" variable in "main.m"). 
To change the structure of heterogeneity in the population, modify the "heterogeneitymat" and "Pxunfiltered" variables (see inline comments for details in "main.m"). 
Modify "Rvect" and "Rallcomb" variables ("main.m") to control the distribution of the different phenotypes at birth.
The vital rates values for high-quality individuals can be changed via the "xmat" and "nx" variables in "main.m". 

Although the code has been used for a two-stage population model and for six synthetic populations, it can be modified for other use cases. 
Reusing this code as a base for different matrix population models (for instance with more stages or with different vital rates) can also be done with additional modifications (changing the "thetamatpop" variable, changing the value of the "nstage" variable, adapting the conditions on vital rates values in the core loops of the "main.m" file, changing the equations of the "popHeteromatfact.m" function to accomodate for the structure of one's matrix model --- see Caswell et al. 2018 (doi: 10.1002/ecm.1306) for adapting the equations). 

Currently the code only supports two values for each heterogeneity group (high and low quality individuals).

**Date of creation:** 2023-02-15 - 2026-07-01
**Project Organization:** The script to run to produce simulation data is "main.m". The script to run to reproduce figures of the article is "plotresults_articlescript.m". results are stored in the "./data" directory. Function called in the scripts are stored in the "./function" directory. 
___

# INSTALLATION

**Step by step instructions:** Install the MATLAB IDE version R2024b. MATLAB licence required. 
**System requirements:** MATLAB code tested with on Ubuntu 24.04.4 LTS (Noble Numbat) x86_64. 
**Required libraries, packages, modules:** No required dependencies, packages or modules.  
**Setup requirements:** No setup requirements. 

___

# USAGE
 
**Step by step instructions:** Open the MATLAB IDE and open main.m. Change the parameter and vital rates if necessary (otherwise keep default values to reproduce article results). Execute each section of the script with shift+enter. 

___

# LICENSE

**Software License:** GNU GPLv3
___

# CONTACT INFORMATION

**Contact**
Name: Jenouvrier Stephanie
Role: Principal investigator
ORCID:
Institution: WHOI 
Email: sjenouvrier@whoi.edu

**Contact**
Name: Stéphanie Jenouvrier and Jean-Pierre Elise
Role: Intern, Maintainer
ORCID: 0000-0003-3324-2383 and 0009-0000-3899-5021
Institution: WHOI and ENS de Lyon
Email: sjenouvrier@whoi.edu and jean-pierre.elise@ens-lyon.fr

